Now, among the awards you have received, which
ones have held for you personally the most
significance? Well, awards are strange things.
Once you get the first one, it's easy to get the
second one, and it's very easy to get the third one.
And once the dam is broken, they sometimes don't
mean a great deal. We celebrated our centennial
year a couple years ago in 1968 and I was very proud
to be selected as one of the 15 people that are
living and dead that have contributed most to
Oregon State University. And this selection was
made by a committee of the faculty and I'm
unashamedly proud of being recognized for having
changed the direction of the university.
And I think that's the most important one. Of
course, I like my honorary doctor of science.
There aren't too many of those around for
researchers of my caliber.
And now, in terms of the direction of your
research, which has now seemed to have found
itself a niche, are there any research
opportunities you've missed? that you feel a
little uneasy about? Would you have possibly
taken something else to task, some other sort of
research challenge, if you'd had enough time?
Well, I sort of feel badly that I didn't latch on to
one thing and stick with it and become a real expert
instead of sort of flopping around. And this is one
of the reasons that I selected what I'm working on
now and have stuck with it for five years. I don't
believe that the proper thing is to jump around
from one subject to another. This is sort of an
opportunist method of doing research, and I think
I would have contributed much more had I stuck to
one thing. Except that oceanographers of your
vintage tended to jump from area to area. Right.
Some things are popular. Some things you can
support at one time. A lot of it is serendipity. It
just comes unexpected. Also, I do wish that I was a
better mathematician.
I feel limited in my mathematics. Most of the
mathematics that's being used now by the younger
modelers wasn't even invented until 10, 15 years
ago. That's true.
What, in your opinion, is the future of the
satellite prediction system? Well, I'm
continually amazed at what they can do with
satellites. I would not have believed this
anywhere along the line, that they could come up
with reasonable near-surface winds, that they
could, in effect, look through clouds and find out
what's on the other side of them. After seeing this
happen and being skeptical, I just can't see what
the end is. They just keep improving things, and
it's just almost like Matthew. So you're very
optimistic about it. Well, I tell myself they've
gone as far as they can go, but they just keep right
on going. So I think that they're going to do more
and more. I sometimes decry the fact that the
amounts of money involved in satellites are very
large compared to research on land, and I feel that
somewhere along the line there might have been a
little better division of funds. I think
satellites sometimes are an overkill.
Now,
in directions that oceanography will probably
go. I realize this is a very difficult question.
What advice would you give to a young student at
what particular field he should enter, what
branch of oceanography, what he should look for?
It's my phone and the secretary. I have some
youngsters to get into.
Well, I think it's a little too bad that quite so
many of the brilliant youngsters are getting in
strictly theoretical work. In particular, a
tremendous amount of work is going into internal
waves of various sizes and kinds. And I think that
we need more people in the middle between theory
and practice in the field. We tend to have
descriptive oceanographers on one side to some
degree and theoreticians on the other and not too
many people in the middle. And I would advise any
student to to try to get into the wedding theory to
what actually is going on in the real world. Moving
away from modeling then, possibly? Well, if they
model, to also do some field work. And then to go
back to sea. Right. Do you think with rising ship
cost, it's going to be more and more difficult to
get ship time to send oceanographers out to sea? I
think it's going to become more and more
difficult, but I think it's peanuts compared to
other items in the federal budget. And I think that
we're being very penny wise and pound foolish by
not supporting more ship time. Now, there are
ships and there are ships. And I think our money
should be going into ships the size of our minimum
deep ocean fleet, which is roughly 175 to 200 feet.
These ships can be operated for like a million
dollars a year. I don't think we need any more very
large ships, these 300-footers, that don't
really do much more than a 150-footer and cost
three or four times as much to operate. So I would
like to see a half a dozen more ships the size of the
Wicoma if we have any new ships. And you think then
that perhaps we have all of the big research
vessels we need for... Well, I do. I've always...
made this statement whenever I could. I think we
have one or two big ones, and this is about all. The
several that NOAA has is all the country needs.
Okay, that's all I wanted to know. Now, do you look
for more cooperative actions between
institutions? That is, more things like MOPA, oh,
that's a poor choice of words, but more deep ocean
work with institutions collectively, like
Scripps? This seems to be the direction that
things are going. If you want to do deep ocean work,
Your best chances of funding are to get into one of
the IDOE programs and cooperate with someone
else.
I'd like to see a balance between individuals
doing what they like to do and people who are forced
to get under a tent and sort of tailor their
research to a larger program. I think there needs
to be a balance. And I think the balance is pretty
good now, and I'd like to see it continue. OK. And I
think if you're not opposed to this kind of deep
ocean research, particularly, Well, not unless
it soaks up all the mic. And I think that right now
it's perhaps a 50-50 split or maybe a little bit
stronger on the large programs. And I think that
the balance is about where it should be. It doesn't
change much more. What do you think about the
obligations of Oregon State to work more and more
inland? That is, to deal more and more with coastal
waters and less and less with the oceans. State
legislatures are putting a tremendous amount of
pressure upon state universities. Well, I think
that we would do this if the state had a bigger,
well, supplied a greater percentage of our funds.
But historically, the university has paid for
teaching and this is all. We don't have any state
funds to speak of. We get a little bit now and then.
Now, in other states where they have larger
programs, like Delaware and Texas and
California, they get big chunks of state money to
help do this and develop these programs. There's
no way we can do this. We can't take money from an ONR
grant or a contract or an NSF one and do state work.
There's no way. ONR tells us, get into deep water.
ONR feels that there's enough money going into the
coastal areas area from other sources, so that
there's no way we can do this and our hands are kind
of tied. We feel a responsibility to the state,
we'd like to do this, we've made abortive efforts
several times to get started, but until we can
convince some legislators that a unit here at
Oregon State would be a good thing, and would need
state support to keep it going, I think that we just
sort of have our hands tied. Now, we have one
breakthrough that's coming. We've done
geophysics for the state. We run the seismographs
and do a lot of survey work for the state. And there
are some positions that will be set up and paid for
out of state funds, and I think this is a start. You
think that may be a beginning then? Yeah. But so
far, the problem is getting one or two legislators
all hepped up on this, and then it will work. But
until we do this, we haven't done a good job of
selling.
Do you look for a reawakened interest in the oceans
any time soon?
Well, we've been hollering wolf ever since I can
remember, and I think the public may be a little bit
tired of this. Maybe we're at our peak interest now
and we'll start going downhill.
Does the current ecology movement bother you in
terms of research? Do you feel uneasy with it?
Well, I feel uneasy with it because I think that we
are going to have to support our population, we're
going to have to feed it, we're going to have to
clothe it, build cars and things like this, and
we've got to have a better balance. I decry
stopping a dam that cost $100 million for half a
dozen small fish. An ecologist would shoot me for
saying this, but I think we have to have a little
bit. We've bent over backwards to save the
environment, and it's cost us a lot of money, and I
don't think we can afford it. Do you feel uneasy
with comments like Jacques Cousteau's that the
sea's dying?
I don't think he even believes it. Okay. The seas
are not dying. As I said before, there are residual
pesticides that are a problem. But aside from
that, the oceans are a tremendous reservoir. Do
you see any time in the near or immediate future
establishing some kind of a system where sewage is
used or really treated sewage or what have you,
treated waste is used to feed certain parts of the
sea? Well, this is out of my field, really. I don't
have a thought about it. That's good enough. I just
wonder if there's been much talk around your
university about creating these kinds of things.
None at all within our department. Okay.
What does your department talk about in terms of
research? What seems to be the direction they wish
to take, your younger men in the department?
Well, we have a very interesting, exciting
geological program, which is to some degree
resource-oriented in the future. And I think that
they will continue with their work, and work of
this type is a precursor to getting hard rock
minerals out of the ocean. We did a big study with
the University of Hawaii on the Nazca Plate off
western South America that lasted two or three
years.
We've done work in rift areas near the Galapagos. I
think eventually it'll become economically
feasible to do hard rock mining and I think our
people will help with this. Now, the next series of
questions I have are really sort of about
oceanographers you've known. What were they
like? What seemed to be their interests? What were
their characteristics? if you should like, what
kind of cooperation or non-cooperation did you
have with them? About the time you began,
oceanography or the direction, if there were a
triumphant, if I may say so, development of
oceanography, it would have been, of course,
Ewing and Revell et al., who were working in the
early O&R office. What kind of recollections do
you have of that? Well, personally, I never had
much to do with either Ewing or Revelle. I met both
on a number of occasions. I find them extremely
fascinating people. They're not only good at what
they're doing, but they're knowledgeable in many
fields. I've listened to them both speak a number
of times. I think we were very fortunate to have
this type of inspirational leaders in the start,
what you might say, in the step function increase
in oceanographic research, which took place
right after the war. I think oceanography has to
some degree suffered because we've not been a more
cohesive political body. And I've endeavored in
the past to try to get some of the labs together to
see if we couldn't influence the funding picture
to some degree through Congress, and I've found
that they're all independents. They don't want to
get together. And I think this has hurt us to some
degree. What sort of a unit would you conceive of?
Well, I started up the Council of Oceanographic
Directors specifically with this in mind about 10
or 15 years ago, and it just died a natural death.
The big labs weren't interested. The directors
didn't even come. And the smaller labs just
weren't politically powerful enough. We needed
scripts in Woods Hole. And I think if there's one
mistake the oceanographers have made, it's
not... to have been a little more political.
Should have combined their interest in terms of
lobbying with Congress? That's right, in a word.
No one of us could do much, but if we were all
together, we could have. Are there any
congressmen you should like to cite who have been
particularly beneficial towards oceanography?
I've been derelict in not following this closely.
Senator Hollings has done a lot of good, I think,
for oceanography. Some
congressmen have done well by their own state
laboratories, and I won't mention the closest
one. University of Washington, I think, has been
fortunate. They've done very, very well. And on
the other hand, some of our congressmen have from
time to time been able to help us and have always
been very cooperative, but we haven't had the
powerful committee chairmanship that some other
states have had. I think if we could get California
and Massachusetts together with all of us behind
it, we could do something. But I've never been able
to get people going. Think it's because Cripps and
Woods Hole have pretty well dominated the field of
oceanography? Well, they feel that they're
powerful enough in their own right, and they don't
want to get together with anybody else. Simple as
that. Now, in terms of, let's say, while we're
talking about these loose historic figures in
oceanography, What do you think were the major
breakthroughs that occurred in oceanography in
your period of active research? If you were to turn
to a student and say, look, this is what
oceanography has done and this is why it was
exciting, what would you cite? Well, of course,
the biggest breakthrough has been the automation
of data collection. I remember lecturing in 1947
and stating, after he'd just come back from the
cruise and he had 800 data points, he said, we just
got too damn much data. And now a student will go out
and come back with 2 million data points. Now, he
could not have gotten that much data then. And he
couldn't have done anything with it without
computers. So it's the electronic system of
gathering data and sensors and recording it, and
then the electronic system of processing it. And
without those two, I don't think we've gotten
anywhere. Oceanography had no breakthroughs and
was very primitive from the time of Nansen up until
the time of Swerter. And then just within four or
five years, we started. I think the first computer
was used in a major oceanographic program,
something like 1947. And that's only 20 years. And
now our students feel absolutely
put upon if they don't have a $10,000 budget for
computers over the time they're getting their
degrees. It costs about that, roughly that much on
average for a physical oceanographic student.
And along with this have come new mathematics,
time series analysis, Fourier transforms, all of
these things, which just weren't used when I was
going to school. We'd never even heard of them. So
you think technological innovations, then?
Right. Well, I would agree with that, by the way.
Let me... Ravel said that when he was asked what he
had contributed, he thought, he said, I sent
Scripps to sea, which may have been an
overstatement. No, I think that's a good
statement. And when Nirenberg was asked what his
contribution to Scripps had been, he said, I
brought to Scripps computers. Now, what I want to
ask you is, in a short, pithy statement like that,
what's your contribution been to Oregon State?
What would you say?
Oh, heavens, I don't know. Look around you. I think
that if I did anything, it was I was able to organize
a minimum amount of resources and produce with it.
And by doing this and continuing to do it, I
obtained support. And our growth was rather
phenomenal. And it wouldn't have been this unless
I'd had some organizational quality. So you
think... Your primary contribution to Oregon
State then was in terms of organization?
Organization and getting the most out of the
minimal amount of resources. So it could be I
brought oceanography to Oregon State then.
That's good enough, yeah. Yeah, there's no
question about that. And what about in terms of
your research? What do you think are the most
important things you've done in terms of
research? Oh, I don't think I've had any
breakthroughs of any kind, really. I think my
research is pedestrian and descriptive. but I
think we need all kinds. When I was in graduate
school, I was about ready to quit because I didn't
have any flashes of genius compared to Walter
Monks, and I went to see Svirt at one time, and all of
a sudden I thought, well, I really didn't think I
was up to it. And Svirt up to a big pyramid, and he
says, for every genius up here, we've got three or
four guys, sub-genius, and we get down, and
wherever you are on the pyramid, as long as you're
doing your best, you're needed, because it takes
the whole thing to keep the business going.
And I think that we need all types of researchers.
And I do the best I can. And I don't think that it's
been anything startling. But nevertheless,
physical, I don't know how you can, one of the, you
know, you realize I'm a rank outsider in this
field, okay, and absolutely a baby in the woods.
But one of the things that bothers me is there seems
to be a drop in physical oceanography and in
systematics, for example, outside of physical
oceanography in terms of just classification of
organisms. students don't seem to be willing to do
these kinds of things. How can you do oceanography
if these things are not done? Shouldn't there be
some kind of a move towards basics in your field,
towards students who are willing to collect and
describe? Well, I think so, but the tendency is not
to fund this sort of thing. I don't think the
problem is so much the students or the
laboratories. I think the problem is in the peer
review system that NSF employs. If you put in for
purely descriptive purposes, pedestrian type
research proposal, your chances of getting it are
not really too good.
And unless you've got a theory all worked out and
practically have all the solutions before you
start, your chances of getting money for this type
of work are getting harder all the time. Now, there
are a few stars that continue to get money for this,
but I think that the numbers are
disproportionate, because most of the younger
guys are theoretical, and if you don't have some
theory in there, your chances are fairly slim.
Now, this may be sour grapes, but I think it's a
fact. Are you unhappy with the peer review system
of the NSF? I think it's the best we could have. I'm
not unhappy with it, no. No, I'm not unhappy with
it. To those of us in the field of history, if I may
ask you to draw some comparisons here, we
sometimes feel that we're in the provinces. if you
allow this, we teach at UT, that people from
Harvard and Yale tend to get the grants because of a
sort of an in-group, if you should like. Do you feel
that possibly the same sort of discrimination is
applied to the people in the sciences? That is, the
bigger laboratories and the bigger
oceanographic institutions seem to have better
luck finding grants for their students or
financing their research? Well, I can't complain
because I've been able to work with the system and
do all right.
I'll withdraw that question.
If I were to ask you, and which I intend to, what you
considered your major accomplishments in your
academic and scholarly career, what would you
list? Well, just making this place go. All right.
This is it. OK. Aside from that, I think that I've
added bits and pieces of descriptive material to a
number of different fields, which are all part of
the mosaic But nothing's darling. But then I think
then that you would agree that when Fleming says
his major thing was establishing an apartment at
the University of Washington. Right. My major
thing is the same. Your major thing was
establishing one at Oregon State. And I want to
make sure we get this on tape because it's hard for a
student, I think, to realize it. But that's, in
effect, bringing oceanography to a place it had
not been before, the Pacific Northwest, a point
you've never really made clear, I don't think.
Yes, I think this is true. Because all the work had
been done in Southern California, in
Massachusetts, been no really Texas coastal work
done or work done in the Pacific Northwest to speak
of until these institutions came here. Okay. And
this is the second one. The Chesapeake Bay
Institute, Don Pritchard and I started that from
Holcroft, too. And it was the same sort of thing on
the East Coast. I really wasn't aware of that.
Right. I guess that was the first oceanographic
institution to be established After the war.
After the war, to work those estuaries, is that
right? Right, right,
1948. See, Columbia was set up about sometime
during the war. Miami was set up a little bit before
that. But then
Johns Hopkins, Texas A&M, Oregon State, Alaska,
Hawaii, just warm fell in right after that. Now...
I want to ask a couple of things about the
Chesapeake Bay along that way, because as I say,
I'm confessing to you very quickly. Had there not
been any work done then along that part of the...
Well, at Solomon's Island and at Gloucester
Point, Virginia and Maryland each had a marine
biological station, which was a summer station
that did a little bit of hydrographic work, but not
a great deal. And if they had been fulfilling the
need that was there, then the states certainly
wouldn't have given Johns Hopkins $30,000 apiece
to start up a new laboratory. But they were mainly
classical marine biological stations. Oh, okay.
When you began to organize this new laboratory,
what did you tell yourself the first thing was that
you needed? Oh, we've got to get a boat first. So we
bought a little boat. And then we... had one built.
We had a fleet, I think, of three or four small
boats. The biggest one was perhaps 25, 30 tons, 60
feet long.
And then we started out doing hydrographic and
chemical work on the estuary and covered it pretty
well for three or four years. And did you work
primarily there with government contracts? It
wouldn't seem likely to me. Well, we got $30,000
from ONR, $30,000 from and $30,000 from Maryland,
and that was a lot of money in those days. Then along
came the Korean War, interest surged, a committee
came around and asked us how much could we grow, and
Pritchard said some number out of his head, I think
it was $200,000, so we got a $200,000 jump at that
time, and then that's where the institute really
began to develop. Did you try to bring in young
scholars to work there? Did you get postdocs and
this sort of thing? Well, postdocs in
oceanography weren't as popular then as they are
now. And part of this reflects the job situation.
Then anybody could go get a job. You didn't have to
be a postdoc. There was no particular advantage,
unless you particularly wanted to study with some
individual. Now jobs are a little harder to get so
that there are more people that are using postdocs
as an interim thing. At least that's my
impression. Maybe extra. It seems like now almost
all scientists go off on a postdoc for a while, and
I've often wondered why that. So I think it's a good
idea, and a few of our students have gone on
postdocs and then come back to work at Oregon
State. And I think, by and large, they've
benefited by it.
Now, when you get this $200,000 jump all of a sudden
in your budget, then what do you do? Well, we
scramble around and hire some people.
I don't know. If you're on a small budget, then you
sort of dream and think about what you do, and then
you have certain plans in the back of your mind.
For example, when I had nothing here, I went to the
Ford Foundation and asked for $60,000 to buy a
small boat. The Ford Foundation sent a panel out.
They looked the place over. and came back and said,
the place has absolutely no chance of
development. Went down to Scripps and gave him $3
million for a new biological program. And this was
about 1957. So
I did have ship plans and ideas no real long-range
plan, but had various alternates that I could do,
and this is what I did. I had these ready to go when
the money became available in the early 60s. And
then you just said, okay, now the money's here,
we'll do this. And with a particular set of
priorities, I take it, beginning each time with
vessels. Right. You have to have a vessel. That's
the first thing. Did your experience at
Chesapeake Bay, did this help to shape your
administrative experience when you arrived here
at Oregon State? I think so, yeah. You think that
You made your mistakes up there, so to speak?
Well, actually, I had two or three years of
administrative experience at Scripps with the BT
section, and at the start of the war, I caught
pneumonia, so I couldn't get into the service, and
I worked for a shipyard in Portland, and they were
so desperate for people that if you could read a
blueprint, you were an automatic engineer, so I
had... Eight or ten people working under me in an
engineering capacity and had charge of building
the sub-assemblies for 30 LSTs and a bunch of
carriers. And this was a good experience and one
that I normally wouldn't have gotten at that age.
And then three years in the Navy was all a good
experience.
So that I had had administrative experience for
five or six years before I got into oceanography.
When you get your first commission, let's say, in
terms of money to build a vessel, do you design it?
Well, I've got the best architect I could, but
actually, largely I design the vessels that I've
worked on. I'd rather do that than anything I can
think of. Oh, okay. And I know this is a naive
question, but what's the first thing you begin to
look for when you start to design it? Do you say,
what's the biggest thing I can get for the money?
Oh, okay, that's the way we begin. All right, for
example, I got $250,000, which I should have been
satisfied to build a 65-foot vessel with. I've
managed to get another $50,000 of return
overhead. That gave me $300,000. And then I shot
for an 80-foot. Well, the size goes up to the cube of
the length. And instead of getting a vessel that
would be extremely limited, I built the Ocona,
which is operating out of Alaska now. And it's
doing a fine job.
The first thing I look for, first of all, you have to
have a vessel that will do the work you want. But
then I'd look for creature comfort. Make the
quarters as good as I can, the eating facilities as
good as I can.
People are out there crowded on a small vessel for a
long period of time, and they need creature
comfort if you can possibly give it to them. And I
think one of the reasons our people seem to be happy
on our ships is that we've tried to do this. Worked
for Living Corps. When you're on the ship now, if
you're out on the voyage, do you still go through
the whole process of pulling watches and the whole
business as one once did when one was a student on
the vessels? Well, you do stand watches, but as a
senior citizen, I avoid it if I can. I just do what
I'm out there to do. But for example, on the
Japanese ship, I didn't stand any watches because
we had about 50 students and other scientific
personnel. On the British ship, I stand regular
watches.
I don't do any real hard work, but there's always
something going on around the clock. And I usually
work about 8, 12 hours a day. is awfully hard to
meet. Well, what sort of innovations have taken
places in the ships themselves? What are the most
important things to have been done to the ships in
terms of facilitating research, except
computers? The most important single thing is a
satellite navigator. A satellite navigator.
There were times when you didn't know within 20
miles where you were in bad weather over a long
period of time. And then we got Loran, which was
reasonably good.